####################################
# Trait list with effects
####################################


Brutes
This species is large and exceptionally strong.


Free spirits
This species has a mild aversion to established rules and ideas. 


Deviants
This species members chronically refuse to conform to any standard society makes. They ever seek to be 'more unique' and different from their peers. 


Iconoclasts
This species is obsessed with non-conformity to the point of complete idiocy. If it's normal or accepted, it's rubbish and probably racist. said the attack helicopter. 


Slow Breeders
This species has a rather low birthrate. 


Very Slow Breeders
This species has a rather low birthrate and takes many years to mature. 


Stagnant
A general lack of fertility, combined with a very long childhood makes this race almost completely stagnant in numbers.


Sedentary
Members of this species prefer to stay at home, and prefer that home to be in the same spot for their entire lives.


Nomadic
Members of this species have a strong wanderlust. 


Weak
This species is rather weak, making them unfit for physical labour. 


Shaky
This species can barely move around without assistance and lifting objects is too much for them. 


Powerless
This species is too weak to move without technological aid. They have no strength in their bodies to perform even the lightest of tasks. 


Slow
Not the brightest minds in the galaxy, this species struggles with logic and advanced reasoning.\n\n Additional -10% global research speed! 


Dumb
This species is incredibly dim-witted. Their memory is very short, they are slow to learn anything, slow to reason and only a small percentage of their population can perform advanced tasks such as research, long term planning, and... math.\n\n Additional -25% global research speed! 


Retarded
This species is utterly mentally retarded. How they ever achieved spaceflight is a great mystery and one that will remain so, because they were largely incapable of writing down their own history. Even the brightest among them suffer from a terrible memory and can barely perform abstract thinking. Most members are more akin to smart animals than truly sentient creatures.\n\n Additional -50% global research speed! 


Unmotivated
Why work? 


Lazy
Why wake up? 


Slothful
Why?... Ah whatever 


Carnivorous
This species can only eat meat, and requires more farms to feed their population. 


Big Stomachs
This species has a rather large daily food intake. 


Glutton
This species consumes ridiculous amounts of food. 


Soft
This species is soft-skinned and easily harmed by harsh environments. 


Delicate
This species needs a very specific environment to survive and can be killed rather easily. 


Frail
A gust of wind, a tap on the head, sunlight- all of these would kill a member of this species. They are extremely frail and unable to adapt. 


Individualists
This species is territorial and members dislike each other. They naturally have trouble cooperating with each other. 


Solitary
Members prefer to live far away from each other. They also prefer not to communicate with each other. When they do, it tends to involve violence. 


Seclusionists
Members of this species tend to seclude themselves completely and live in isolation as much as possible. Encounters are frequently met with insults, violence and war. They seem to be very fond of walls as well. 


Weird
This species is rather unsettling to be in a room with, or communicate with, even for an alien species. 


Filthy
This species communicates is rather rude and impolite. They also excrete a watery fluid from their skin. 


Utterly Disgusting
This species is offensive, impolite and extremely ugly to almost all other species. They excrete disgusting, brown, yellow, white and red bodily fluids from their weird, ugly orifices and fleshy extensions. 


Short-lived
This species' lifespan has not improved much since their early days. 


Fleeting
This species has the awful habit of dying rather shortly after reaching maturity. 


Dust in the wind
This species has its mid-life crisis during infancy. 


Careless
This species generally doesn't recycle resources, they prefer to simply produce more. 


Luxurious
What would be great riches and luxury to others is completely mundane to this species. 


Decadent
This species has an intolerance to anything but the finest food and the most priceless items covered in rare metals.. 


Flexible
We're not retreating; we're just advancing in a different direction!. 


Cowards
We're not surrendering; we're just doing a tactical power exchange! 


Craven
Fight?!... Are you mad?! What if they hurt us? 


Smart
This species is rather bright. Even average members are known to be reasonable and quick to learn. 


Genius
This species learns at a staggering pace. They are far-sighted minds with incredible memories and the capacity to weave complex ideas very fast. 


Hyperintelligence
Genetically improved neural paths guarantee that every member of society is exceptionally intelligent. Full neural control enables them to truly multitask or hyperfocus on a single task, at will, and develop skills and ideas at an unprecedented pace. 


Sparing
This species doesn't need much food, and thus needs relatively little farming land. 


Efficient tracts
Symbiotic micro-organisms provide additional energy and nutrition to this species, reducing their required food consumption considerably. 


Self-Sufficient
Genetically enhanced micro symbiotics remove almost all need for this species to ingest food; they are fully self-sufficient. 


Tough
This species endures even in harsh environments and is tough to kill. 


Steel-Skinned
This species can live and breed even in hostile environments. They have redundant organs and limbs and are notoriously hard to kill. 


Adamantium
Genetically enhanced tissue structures, bones infused with advanced alloys and nanotics that filter toxins and repair damage; this species is close to indestructible. They can survive on worlds that are completely alien to them and fight on despite sustaining hits that would shred lesser species. 


Motivated
This species likes organising stuff. And doing stuff. And writing stuff. And making stuff. And building stuff. Let's do some stuff. 


Restless
This species barely ever rests. Literally, because they barely need sleep except for healing physically. As a result they tend to get a lot done. 


Fully Awake
Enhanced neural feedback and healing systems remove the need for sleep and make this species fully aware and concentrated on their tasks. They never lack motivation to get things done and can work endlessly. 


Fertile
This species produces lots of offspring. 


Fast Breeders
This species doesn't really breed like rabbits. They breed somewhat faster. 


Machine-assisted reproduction
Artifical wombs combined with neural implants allow for explosive population growth. Unlike clones these are genetically unique. 


Talented
This species has a great amount of variance. Consequently there are many individuals with very particular talents or skill sets. 


Gifted
Artificial addition and recombination of DNA allows for even greater variance in this species. 


Strong
This species has an animal-like high body strength. 


Brutes
Capable of running at immense speeds, lifting object a dozen times their own weight and breaking through walls of solid rock; this species is exceptionally strong. They can literally rip lesser species in half and can do certain tasks by hand where others would require specialized tools. 


Hulking
Genetic alterations reach the limit of what biological tissue can output in terms of raw strength. Added with integrated biomechanical actuators, this species has a strength equivalent to that of the best robotic counterparts. They can tear and bend metal like paper. 


Highly Social
This species is naturally social and communal. They tolerate each other well and cooperate nicely. 


Communal
This species loves connecting, cooperating, helping and generally working with others. 


Altruistic
Neural imprinting has made this species perfectly altruistic to their own. They operate and live in harmony and happiness, without crime or violence. 


Polite
This species is always polite, even to xenos. 


Charismatic
This species manages to come off as charismatic even to alien species. 


Attractive
Careful study of xeno communication, in combination with altered pheromone composition, allow this species to be wildly attractive even to completely alien species. 


Mainstream
If the majority thinks it's right, it probably is right. Right? 


Conformists
United we stand. Divided we fall. 


Redditors
Neural implants link this species consciousness to their very own subreddit. Though not a true hivemind, they will utterly wreck anyone who has a different view on things. 


Venerable
This species has a generous lifespan. 


Ancient
The centuries pass; I shall remain. 


Clinically Immortal
Genome storage combined with advanced cellular nanotics allows for indefinite repair of damaged DNA in a living organism. Together with ultra-advanced healthcare, this makes an organism clinically immortal. 


Stubborn
This species is naturally stubborn and fearless. They will fight on despite overwhelming odds. 


Foolhardy
Have you learned nothing of the stubbornness of dwarves? 


Unyielding
'Tis but a scratch!. 


Conserving
Waste not, want not. 


Ascetic
It is not the xeno who has too little that is poor, but the one who hankers after more. 


Stoic
Non est ad astra mollis e terris via


Pestilence
This species breeds like insects, and behaves a bit like them too. They are naturally short-lived and not particularly well-educated as a result, and overpopulation is the standard.


Enraged
Anger inhibitions removed. Hormones at maximum tolerable level. This species will attack anything that is not them on sight; they are in a state of constant and blind RAGE.


Lobotomite
An extremely crude operation. No fancy genetic modding or nanotics for these poor bummers; they had a couple of cuts made in their neural paths and now they're little more than decoration.


Constant Pain
This species lives in constant, amplified and unbearable pain throughout their entire body. Combined with clinical immortality, they live in a very real and eternal hell in space. You really are a piece of work aren't you? Ha, but it's just a game! - Yea. Sure.


Crippled
Genetic kill switches and a general decrease in strength and integrity. This will ensure any would be rebellion from this species is sure to fail. 


Culinary Dish
This species has been modified to perfectly match the culinary tastes of all known and hypothetical higher lifeforms.


Slave Dependent
This species requires servants to stay happy.


Lingua Idumentis
This species has the peculiar trait of communicating through apparel. They are both fascinating and extremely frustrating to xenos.


Olfactory communication
This species has developed a method of communication which relies entirely on the secretion and subtle interpretation of gaseous expulsions.


Lithovore
A silicon-based lifeform, lithovore species grow no crops. Or as they like to put it: We do not sow..


Energy Lifeform
A pure energy lifeform. These creatures consume electricity instead of organic matter.


Euphoria
In a constant state of euphoria, this species is always happy and content. Sometimes a little too content with nothing.


Defensive Nature
This race instinctively tends to focus on defence only, preferring to wait out the end of a war rather than just finish it.\n\n military stations triple damage, 6 times more hitpoints, -80% cost, but navy size -90%


Dread Masters
The stuff of nightmares, these ghostly critters are masters of dread and psychological warfare. They instil fear in even the bravest of soldiers.


Liberal Arts
This species pursues the biological studies and the liberal arts above all. They don't mind being cashier for the rest of their live either.\n\n +25% influence empire-wide +50% tile influence output 


Engineers
Obsessed with machines and materials, this species has little interest in things that grow or pointless theories.\n\n -25% building cost, +20% ship build speed, +20% ship hitpoints, +20% ship armour


Lab Rats
Theories and invisible particles - if it has a practical application it is of no interest to this species. They care only for what is unseen and the great Why?.\n\n +20% shield points, +20% weapon damage


Irradiated
This species is naturally resistant to radiation and can comfortably inhabit places that are lit up with gamma rays.


Independent
This species will fiercely stand up to any attempt at conquest. Members have been known to yell Freedooooooooom even as they had their guts spilled over the floor.


Silent Observers
Watch and learn. - this species lurks in far systems, spying on others with vast sensor arrays.\n\n +400% sensor range \n\n -33% naval cap


Egg Born
This species matures completely inside eggs. This makes their colonization attempts a lot easier.\n\n Colony ships build 4 times faster and are twice as cheap


Hoarders
Like dragons, this species hoards its riches into endlessly large piles. The logistics of storing so much material reduce their production efficiency somewhat though.\n\n +200000 storage cap \n\n tiny production penalty


Curious
This species is naturally curious and creative, making them very thorough in their searches. They find more anomalies and think of alternative solutions.\n\n 2 research alternatives +100% anomaly chance -50% survey speed


Uncreative
This species has no creativity and exploration bores them. They are extremely inept at finding innovative solutions to problems and their usual interstellar exploration protocol is to take one picture and leave.\n\n -10 research alternatives -50% anomaly chance +100% survey speed


Airborne
I believe I can fly... -Wait what? I have no Avian portrait? Well, just imagine I have one then. - This species is comfortable with 3 dimensional engagements and performs better in stellar combat as well.\n\n ship .2 \n\n ship 0 \n\n ship 0 


Titanic
Rise up! Rise up! Rise up you sleeping giant!\n\n Titanic lifeforms, towering above the trees. Their buildings, tools, weapons and ships fit their size, as do their stomachs.


Obsessed with shields
This species developed shield technology before FTL technology and got addicted to it rather quickly. They shun armor in favor of MOAHR SHIELDS!\n\n +400% shield power, -75% hull integrity 


Tiny
What's this? A ship for ants?\n\n This species stands less than 5 centimetres tall. No amount of tools or machines can completely eliminate the fact that all they produce tends to be tiny. Even their largest ships are small in comparison to the average corvette.


Subterranean
Native tunnellers, this species dwells mostly underground, digging ever deeper and deeper. They make great use of even the smallest planets, given enough time to build their tunnel networks.\n\n Any planet habited by this species slowly goes up to 25 tiles.


Hibernation
This species comes from a planet with long, long winters. They naturally hibernate for an entire year, once every decade.\n\n Every decade, your species enters hibernation, crippling production and military efforts.


Blatant Bonus
Give this species a free trait point bonus. Purely for roleplaying and making more powerful custom races, otherwise it's just blatant cheating. Which is fine- just don't whine if the game is no fun anymore when you've picked all the best traits.


Penalty
For a bigger challenge, give yourself this trait point penalty.\n\n 


Bring it on
Can't stop min-maxing? Give yourself this penalty to feel less guilty about it.\n\n 


Masochist
This is the best trait in the game... if you like suffering needlessly for hours.\n\n


Custom Race
If you're making a custom AI race, you NEED to include this trait. It prevents the other random traits from being assigned to it on game start. If you don't give your custom AI race this trait it will have additional random traits which will completely screw up your creatively thought up fantasy race.\n\n This is not required for PLAYER races.


Living Planet
This organism encompasses its entire homeworld and is ingrained with it. It *is* the planet and the planet *is* the organism. Single-minded and in perfect unity; the Living Planet does not tolerate other species or planets to exist.\n\nA single, powerful homeworld for the entire game. Cannot colonize other planets. Cannot annex planets. Cannot accept xenos. No migration. No diplomacy. Upon annexation, enemy planets are permanently destroyed.


Cyborgs
Even before discovering FTL travel, this species experimented with cybernetics, and long since they have all started replacing their organic bodyparts with synthetic counterparts. Limbs, neural implants, sensors... members are often already 'enhanced' during infancy.



Synthethic Lifeform
This lifeform was artificially constructed.


Brood Parasite
An asexual parasite, this species can only reproduce inside a living host. They reproduce exceptionally fast in alien lifeforms, rapidly adapting inside their bodies, whilst injecting them with stimulating chemicals. Infected hosts are completely infatuated with their parasite and its offspring, reducing their own reproduction speed, but making them happier... in a very creepy, unhealthy way. \n\n +200% growth speed when xeno pop present on planet, -50% growth speed for infected xeno pop.